Proposed content of pathogenesis/transmission manuscript (#745)
greenelab/covid19-review: content/40.inequality.md

However, hospitalization rates vary by location [@doi:10.15585/mmwr.mm6915e3].
This variation may be influenced by demographic (e.g., average age in the area), medical (e.g., the prevalence of comorbid conditions such as diabetes), and social (e.g., income or healthcare availability) factors that vary geographically.
Additionally, some of the same factors may influence an individual's probability of exposure to SARS-CoV-2, their risk of developing a more serious case of COVID-19 that would require hospitalization, and their access to medical support.
As a result, quantifying or comparing susceptibility among individuals, communities, or other groups requires consideration of a number of complex phenomena that intersect across many disciplines of research.
In this section, the term "risk factors" is used to refer to variables that are statistically associated with more severe COVID-19 outcomes.
Some are intrinsic characteristics that have been observed to carry an association with variation in outcomes, whereas others may be more functionally linked to the pathophysiology of COVID-19.

#### Patient Traits Associated with Increased Risk

> Two traits that have been consistently associated with more severe COVID-19 outcomes are male sex and advanced age.

Author: ```suggestion
Two traits that have been consistently associated with more severe COVID-19 outcomes are male sex and advanced age (typically defined as 60 or older, with the greatest risk among those 85 and older [@url:https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/need-extra-precautions/older-adults.html]).
```

Both of these risk factors can be approached through the lens of biology.
The biological basis for greater susceptibility with age is likely linked to the prevalence of extenuating health conditions such as heart failure or diabetes [@doi:10.1111/jgs.16472].
Several hypotheses have been proposed to account for differences in severity between males and females.
For example, some evidence suggests that female sex hormones may be protective [@doi:10.1186/s13293-020-00304-9; @doi:10.1371/journal.ppat.1008570].
ACE2 expression in the kidneys of male mice was observed to be twice as high as that of females, and a regulatory effect of estradiol on ACE2 expression was demonstrated by removing the gonads and then supplementing with estradiol [@doi:10.1186/2042-6410-1-6; @doi:10.1371/journal.ppat.1008570].
Other work in mice has shown an inverse association between mortality due to SARS-CoV-1 and estradiol, suggesting a protective role for the sex hormone [@doi:10.1371/journal.ppat.1008570].

> Similarly, evidence suggests that similar patterns might be found in other tissues: preliminary analysis suggested that male patients with aortic valve stenosis showed higher levels of ACE2 expression in the myocardium than females, although this pattern was not found in controls, and research indicated that females responded to lower doses of heart medications that act on a pathway shared with ACE2 (Renin angiotensin aldosterone system or RAAS) [@doi:10.1186/s13293-020-00304-9].

Author: ```suggestion
Similarly, evidence suggests that similar patterns might be found in other tissues.
A preliminary analysis identified higher levels of ACE2 expression in the myocardium of male patients with aortic valve stenosis showed  than female patients, although this pattern was not found in controls [@doi:10.1186/s13293-020-00304-9].
Additionally, research has indicated that females respond to lower doses than males of heart medications that act on the Renin angiotensin aldosterone system (RAAS) pathway, which is shared with ACE2 [@doi:10.1186/s13293-020-00304-9].
```

@ajlee21 does this help?

> Similarly, evidence suggests that similar patterns might be found in other tissues: preliminary analysis suggested that male patients with aortic valve stenosis may show higher levels of ACE2 expression in the myocardium than females, although this pattern was not found in controls, and research has indicated that females may respond to lower doses of heart medications that act on a pathway shared with ACE2 (Renin angiotensin aldosterone system or RAAS) [@doi:10.1186/s13293-020-00304-9].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Similarly, evidence suggests that similar patterns might be found in other tissues: preliminary analysis suggested that male patients with aortic valve stenosis showed higher levels of ACE2 expression in the myocardium than females, although this pattern was not found in controls, and research indicated that females responded to lower doses of heart medications that act on a pathway shared with ACE2 (Renin angiotensin aldosterone system or RAAS) [@doi:10.1186/s13293-020-00304-9].
```

Reviewer: Not sure what the wording meant by "suggested" here. I wonder if it should just say `Similarly, evidence suggested that similar patterns might be found in other tissues: preliminary analysis showed that male patients with aortic valve stenosis had higher levels...`

In particular, Black Americans are consistently identified as carrying a higher burden of COVID-19 than white Americans [@doi:10.1377/hlthaff.2020.00598; @doi:10.15585/mmwr.mm6925e1], with differences in the rates of kidney complications from COVID-19 particularly pronounced [@doi:10.1016/j.kint.2020.05.006].
Statistics from a number of cities indicate significant discrepancies between the proportion of COVID-19 cases and deaths in Black Americans relative to their representation in the general population [@doi:10/ggv494].
In addition to Black Americans, disproportionate harm and mortality from COVID-19 has also been noted in Latino/Hispanic Americans and in Native American and Alaskan Native communities, including the Navajo nation [@doi:10.1001/jama.2020.8598; @doi:10.1136/bmj.m1483; @doi:10.1111/jrh.12451; https://www.nytimes.com/2020/04/09/us/coronavirus-navajo-nation.html?searchResultPosition=10; @url:https://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2020/07/05/us/coronavirus-latinos-african-americans-cdc-data.html; @doi:10.1093/tbm/ibaa055; @url:https://journalhosting.ucalgary.ca/index.php/jisd/article/view/70753/54416].

> In Brazil indigenous communities likewise carry an increased burden of COVID-19 [@doi:10.1126/science.abc0073].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In Brazil, indigenous communities likewise carry an increased burden of COVID-19 [@doi:10.1126/science.abc0073].
```
